README.md, before:

# Patches

- added `proxy_url` to the builder and all backends
- made `name: String` in `FunctionBuilder` public, so all available tool names can be retrieved
- added total used tokens to `google.rs`, `openai.rs` and `cohere.rs` backends
- added `TooManyRequests(String)` to `pub enum LLMError` for all backends
- add Cohere backend
- add GitHub Copilot backend
- allow an empty `api_key` in the `LLMBuilder` - then the Authorization header is not set

# LLM

> **Note**: This crate name previously belonged to another project. The current implementation represents a new and different library. The previous crate is now archived and will not receive any updates. **ref: https://github.com/rustformers/llm**

**LLM** is a **Rust** library that lets you use **multiple LLM backends** in a single project: [OpenAI](https://openai.com), [Anthropic (Claude)](https://www.anthropic.com), [Ollama](https://github.com/ollama/ollama), [DeepSeek](https://www.deepseek.com), [xAI](https://x.ai), [Phind](https://www.phind.com), [Groq](https://www.groq.com), [Google](https://cloud.google.com/gemini) and [ElevenLabs](https://elevenlabs.io).
With a **unified API** and **builder style** - similar to the Stripe experience - you can easily create **chat**, text **completion**, speak-to-text requests without multiplying structures and crates.

## Key Features

- **Multi-backend**: Manage OpenAI, Anthropic, Ollama, DeepSeek, xAI, Phind, Groq and Google through a single entry point.
- **Multi-step chains**: Create multi-step chains with different backends at each step.
- **Templates**: Use templates to create complex prompts with variables.
- **Builder pattern**: Configure your LLM (model, temperature, max_tokens, timeouts...) with a few simple calls.
- **Chat & Completions**: Two unified traits (`ChatProvider` and `CompletionProvider`) to cover most use cases.
- **Extensible**: Easily add new backends.
- **Rust-friendly**: Designed with clear traits, unified error handling, and conditional compilation via *features*.
- **Validation**: Add validation to your requests to ensure the output is what you expect.
- **Evaluation**: Add evaluation to your requests to score the output of LLMs.
- **Parallel Evaluation**: Evaluate multiple LLM providers in parallel and select the best response based on scoring functions.
- **Function calling**: Add function calling to your requests to use tools in your LLMs.
- **REST API**: Serve any LLM backend as a REST API with openai standard format.
- **Vision**: Add vision to your requests to use images in your LLMs.
- **Reasoning**: Add reasoning to your requests to use reasoning in your LLMs.
- **Structured Output**: Request structured output from certain LLM providers based on a provided JSON schema.
- **Speech to text**: Transcribe audio to text
- **Text to speech**: Transcribe text to audio
- **Memory**: Store and retrieve conversation history with sliding window (soon others) and shared memory support
- **Agentic**: Build reactive agents that can cooperate via shared memory, with configurable triggers, roles and validation.

## Use any LLM backend on your project

Simply add **LLM** to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
llm = { version = "1.2.4", features = ["openai", "anthropic", "ollama", "deepseek", "xai", "phind", "google", "groq", "Elevenlabs"] }
```

## Use any LLM on cli

LLM includes a command-line tool for easily interacting with different LLM models. You can install it with: ```cargo install llm```

- Use `llm` to start an interactive chat session
- Use `llm openai:gpt-4o` to start an interactive chat session with provider:model
- Use `llm set OPENAI_API_KEY your_key` to configure your API key
- Use `llm default openai:gpt-4` to set a default provider
- Use `echo "Hello World" | llm` to pipe
- Use `llm --provider openai --model gpt-4 --temperature 0.7` for advanced options

## Serving any LLM backend as a REST API
- Use standard messages format
- Use step chains to chain multiple LLM backends together
- Expose the chain through a REST API with openai standard format

```shell
[dependencies]
llm = { version = "1.2.4", features = ["openai", "anthropic", "ollama", "deepseek", "xai", "phind", "google", "groq", "api", "elevenlabs"] }
```

More details in the [`api_example`](examples/api_example.rs)

## More examples

| Name | Description |
|------|-------------|
| [`anthropic_example`](examples/anthropic_example.rs) | Demonstrates integration with Anthropic's Claude model for chat completion |
| [`anthropic_streaming_example`](examples/anthropic_streaming_example.rs) | Anthropic streaming chat example demonstrating real-time token generation |
| [`chain_example`](examples/chain_example.rs) | Shows how to create multi-step prompt chains for exploring programming language features |
| [`deepseek_example`](examples/deepseek_example.rs) | Basic DeepSeek chat completion example with deepseek-chat models |
| [`embedding_example`](examples/embedding_example.rs) | Basic embedding example with OpenAI's API |
| [`multi_backend_example`](examples/multi_backend_example.rs) | Illustrates chaining multiple LLM backends (OpenAI, Anthropic, DeepSeek) together in a single workflow |
| [`ollama_example`](examples/ollama_example.rs) | Example of using local LLMs through Ollama integration |
| [`openai_example`](examples/openai_example.rs) | Basic OpenAI chat completion example with GPT models |
| [`openai_streaming_example`](examples/openai_streaming_example.rs) | OpenAI streaming chat example demonstrating real-time token generation |
| [`phind_example`](examples/phind_example.rs) | Basic Phind chat completion example with Phind-70B model |
| [`validator_example`](examples/validator_example.rs) | Basic validator example with Anthropic's Claude model |
| [`xai_example`](examples/xai_example.rs) | Basic xAI chat completion example with Grok models |
| [`xai_streaming_example`](examples/xai_streaming_example.rs) | X.AI streaming chat example demonstrating real-time token generation |
| [`evaluation_example`](examples/evaluation_example.rs) | Basic evaluation example with Anthropic, Phind and DeepSeek |
| [`evaluator_parallel_example`](examples/evaluator_parallel_example.rs) | Evaluate multiple LLM providers in parallel |
| [`google_example`](examples/google_example.rs) | Basic Google Gemini chat completion example with Gemini models |
| [`google_streaming_example`](examples/google_streaming_example.rs) | Google streaming chat example demonstrating real-time token generation |
| [`google_pdf`](examples/google_pdf.rs) | Google Gemini chat with PDF attachment |
| [`google_image`](examples/google_image.rs) | Google Gemini chat with PDF attachment |
| [`google_embedding_example`](examples/google_embedding_example.rs) | Basic Google Gemini embedding example with Gemini models |
| [`tool_calling_example`](examples/tool_calling_example.rs) | Basic tool calling example with OpenAI |
| [`google_tool_calling_example`](examples/google_tool_calling_example.rs) | Google Gemini function calling example with complex JSON schema for meeting scheduling |
| [`json_schema_nested_example`](examples/json_schema_nested_example.rs) | Advanced example demonstrating deeply nested JSON schemas with arrays of objects and complex data structures |
| [`tool_json_schema_cycle_example`](examples/tool_json_schema_cycle_example.rs) | Complete tool calling cycle with JSON schema validation and structured responses |
| [`unified_tool_calling_example`](examples/unified_tool_calling_example.rs) | Unified tool calling with selectable provider - demonstrates multi-turn tool use and tool choice |
| [`deepclaude_pipeline_example`](examples/deepclaude_pipeline_example.rs) | Basic deepclaude pipeline example with DeepSeek and Claude |
| [`api_example`](examples/api_example.rs) | Basic API (openai standard format) example with OpenAI, Anthropic, DeepSeek and Groq |
| [`api_deepclaude_example`](examples/api_deepclaude_example.rs) | Basic API (openai standard format) example with DeepSeek and Claude |
| [`anthropic_vision_example`](examples/anthropic_vision_example.rs) | Basic anthropic vision example with Anthropic |
| [`openai_vision_example`](examples/openai_vision_example.rs) | Basic openai vision example with OpenAI |
| [`openai_reasoning_example`](examples/openai_reasoning_example.rs) | Basic openai reasoning example with OpenAI |
| [`anthropic_thinking_example`](examples/anthropic_thinking_example.rs) | Anthropic reasoning example |
| [`elevenlabs_stt_example`](examples/elevenlabs_stt_example.rs) | Speech-to-text transcription example using ElevenLabs |
| [`elevenlabs_tts_example`](examples/elevenlabs_tts_example.rs) | Text-to-speech example using ElevenLabs |
| [`openai_stt_example`](examples/openai_stt_example.rs) | Speech-to-text transcription example using OpenAI |
| [`openai_tts_example`](examples/openai_tts_example.rs) | Text-to-speech example using OpenAI |
| [`tts_rodio_example`](examples/tts_rodio_example.rs) | Text-to-speech with rodio example using OpenAI |
| [`chain_audio_text_example`](examples/chain_audio_text_example.rs) | Example demonstrating a multi-step chain combining speech-to-text and text processing |
| [`xai_search_chain_tts_example`](examples/xai_search_chain_tts_example.rs) | Example demonstrating a multi-step chain combining XAI search, OpenAI summarization, and ElevenLabs text-to-speech with Rodio playback |
| [`xai_search_example`](examples/xai_search_example.rs) | Example demonstrating X.AI search functionality with search modes, date ranges, and source filtering |
| [`memory_example`](examples/memory_example.rs) | Automatic memory integration - LLM remembers conversation context across calls |
| [`memory_share_example`](examples/memory_share_example.rs) | Example demonstrating shared memory between multiple LLM providers |
| [`trim_strategy_example`](examples/trim_strategy_example.rs) | Example demonstrating memory trimming strategies with automatic summarization |
| [`agent_builder_example`](examples/agent_builder_example.rs) | Example of reactive agents cooperating via shared memory, demonstrating creation of LLM agents with roles, conditions|
| [`openai_web_search_example`](examples/openai_web_search_example.rs) | Example demonstrating OpenAI web search functionality with location-based search context |
| [`model_listing_example`](examples/model_listing_example.rs) | Example demonstrating how to list available models from an LLM backend |







## Usage
Here's a basic example using OpenAI for chat completion. See the examples directory for other backends (Anthropic, Ollama, DeepSeek, xAI, Google, Phind, Elevenlabs), embedding capabilities, and more advanced use cases.

Commit message:

Allow flexible use of base URL in backends by adding is_base_url_absolute flag
- Introduce is_base_url_absolute option in backends for URL handling
- Add is_base_url_absolute parameter to AzureOpenAI, Cohere, and OpenAI constructors
- Update chat request URL logic to respect absolute or relative base URLs
- Modify LLMBuilder to support setting is_base_url_absolute flag for backends

Authored by: Pollinations AI: Llama 3.3 70B

README.md, after:

# Patches

- added `proxy_url` to the builder and all backends
- made `name: String` in `FunctionBuilder` public, so all available tool names can be retrieved
- added total used tokens to `google.rs`, `openai.rs` and `cohere.rs` backends
- added `TooManyRequests(String)` to `pub enum LLMError` for all backends
- add Cohere backend
- add GitHub Copilot backend
- allow an empty `api_key` in the `LLMBuilder` - then the Authorization header is not set
- add `is_base_url_absolute` to the `LLMBuilder` to avoid appending `chat/completions` to the URL always, this is required for PollinationsAI

# LLM

> **Note**: This crate name previously belonged to another project. The current implementation represents a new and different library. The previous crate is now archived and will not receive any updates. **ref: https://github.com/rustformers/llm**

**LLM** is a **Rust** library that lets you use **multiple LLM backends** in a single project: [OpenAI](https://openai.com), [Anthropic (Claude)](https://www.anthropic.com), [Ollama](https://github.com/ollama/ollama), [DeepSeek](https://www.deepseek.com), [xAI](https://x.ai), [Phind](https://www.phind.com), [Groq](https://www.groq.com), [Google](https://cloud.google.com/gemini) and [ElevenLabs](https://elevenlabs.io).
With a **unified API** and **builder style** - similar to the Stripe experience - you can easily create **chat**, text **completion**, speak-to-text requests without multiplying structures and crates.

## Key Features

- **Multi-backend**: Manage OpenAI, Anthropic, Ollama, DeepSeek, xAI, Phind, Groq and Google through a single entry point.
- **Multi-step chains**: Create multi-step chains with different backends at each step.
- **Templates**: Use templates to create complex prompts with variables.
- **Builder pattern**: Configure your LLM (model, temperature, max_tokens, timeouts...) with a few simple calls.
- **Chat & Completions**: Two unified traits (`ChatProvider` and `CompletionProvider`) to cover most use cases.
- **Extensible**: Easily add new backends.
- **Rust-friendly**: Designed with clear traits, unified error handling, and conditional compilation via *features*.
- **Validation**: Add validation to your requests to ensure the output is what you expect.
- **Evaluation**: Add evaluation to your requests to score the output of LLMs.
- **Parallel Evaluation**: Evaluate multiple LLM providers in parallel and select the best response based on scoring functions.
- **Function calling**: Add function calling to your requests to use tools in your LLMs.
- **REST API**: Serve any LLM backend as a REST API with openai standard format.
- **Vision**: Add vision to your requests to use images in your LLMs.
- **Reasoning**: Add reasoning to your requests to use reasoning in your LLMs.
- **Structured Output**: Request structured output from certain LLM providers based on a provided JSON schema.
- **Speech to text**: Transcribe audio to text
- **Text to speech**: Transcribe text to audio
- **Memory**: Store and retrieve conversation history with sliding window (soon others) and shared memory support
- **Agentic**: Build reactive agents that can cooperate via shared memory, with configurable triggers, roles and validation.

## Use any LLM backend on your project

Simply add **LLM** to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
llm = { version = "1.2.4", features = ["openai", "anthropic", "ollama", "deepseek", "xai", "phind", "google", "groq", "Elevenlabs"] }
```

## Use any LLM on cli

LLM includes a command-line tool for easily interacting with different LLM models. You can install it with: ```cargo install llm```

- Use `llm` to start an interactive chat session
- Use `llm openai:gpt-4o` to start an interactive chat session with provider:model
- Use `llm set OPENAI_API_KEY your_key` to configure your API key
- Use `llm default openai:gpt-4` to set a default provider
- Use `echo "Hello World" | llm` to pipe
- Use `llm --provider openai --model gpt-4 --temperature 0.7` for advanced options

## Serving any LLM backend as a REST API
- Use standard messages format
- Use step chains to chain multiple LLM backends together
- Expose the chain through a REST API with openai standard format

```shell
[dependencies]
llm = { version = "1.2.4", features = ["openai", "anthropic", "ollama", "deepseek", "xai", "phind", "google", "groq", "api", "elevenlabs"] }
```

More details in the [`api_example`](examples/api_example.rs)

## More examples

| Name | Description |
|------|-------------|
| [`anthropic_example`](examples/anthropic_example.rs) | Demonstrates integration with Anthropic's Claude model for chat completion |
| [`anthropic_streaming_example`](examples/anthropic_streaming_example.rs) | Anthropic streaming chat example demonstrating real-time token generation |
| [`chain_example`](examples/chain_example.rs) | Shows how to create multi-step prompt chains for exploring programming language features |
| [`deepseek_example`](examples/deepseek_example.rs) | Basic DeepSeek chat completion example with deepseek-chat models |
| [`embedding_example`](examples/embedding_example.rs) | Basic embedding example with OpenAI's API |
| [`multi_backend_example`](examples/multi_backend_example.rs) | Illustrates chaining multiple LLM backends (OpenAI, Anthropic, DeepSeek) together in a single workflow |
| [`ollama_example`](examples/ollama_example.rs) | Example of using local LLMs through Ollama integration |
| [`openai_example`](examples/openai_example.rs) | Basic OpenAI chat completion example with GPT models |
| [`openai_streaming_example`](examples/openai_streaming_example.rs) | OpenAI streaming chat example demonstrating real-time token generation |
| [`phind_example`](examples/phind_example.rs) | Basic Phind chat completion example with Phind-70B model |
| [`validator_example`](examples/validator_example.rs) | Basic validator example with Anthropic's Claude model |
| [`xai_example`](examples/xai_example.rs) | Basic xAI chat completion example with Grok models |
| [`xai_streaming_example`](examples/xai_streaming_example.rs) | X.AI streaming chat example demonstrating real-time token generation |
| [`evaluation_example`](examples/evaluation_example.rs) | Basic evaluation example with Anthropic, Phind and DeepSeek |
| [`evaluator_parallel_example`](examples/evaluator_parallel_example.rs) | Evaluate multiple LLM providers in parallel |
| [`google_example`](examples/google_example.rs) | Basic Google Gemini chat completion example with Gemini models |
| [`google_streaming_example`](examples/google_streaming_example.rs) | Google streaming chat example demonstrating real-time token generation |
| [`google_pdf`](examples/google_pdf.rs) | Google Gemini chat with PDF attachment |
| [`google_image`](examples/google_image.rs) | Google Gemini chat with PDF attachment |
| [`google_embedding_example`](examples/google_embedding_example.rs) | Basic Google Gemini embedding example with Gemini models |
| [`tool_calling_example`](examples/tool_calling_example.rs) | Basic tool calling example with OpenAI |
| [`google_tool_calling_example`](examples/google_tool_calling_example.rs) | Google Gemini function calling example with complex JSON schema for meeting scheduling |
| [`json_schema_nested_example`](examples/json_schema_nested_example.rs) | Advanced example demonstrating deeply nested JSON schemas with arrays of objects and complex data structures |
| [`tool_json_schema_cycle_example`](examples/tool_json_schema_cycle_example.rs) | Complete tool calling cycle with JSON schema validation and structured responses |
| [`unified_tool_calling_example`](examples/unified_tool_calling_example.rs) | Unified tool calling with selectable provider - demonstrates multi-turn tool use and tool choice |
| [`deepclaude_pipeline_example`](examples/deepclaude_pipeline_example.rs) | Basic deepclaude pipeline example with DeepSeek and Claude |
| [`api_example`](examples/api_example.rs) | Basic API (openai standard format) example with OpenAI, Anthropic, DeepSeek and Groq |
| [`api_deepclaude_example`](examples/api_deepclaude_example.rs) | Basic API (openai standard format) example with DeepSeek and Claude |
| [`anthropic_vision_example`](examples/anthropic_vision_example.rs) | Basic anthropic vision example with Anthropic |
| [`openai_vision_example`](examples/openai_vision_example.rs) | Basic openai vision example with OpenAI |
| [`openai_reasoning_example`](examples/openai_reasoning_example.rs) | Basic openai reasoning example with OpenAI |
| [`anthropic_thinking_example`](examples/anthropic_thinking_example.rs) | Anthropic reasoning example |
| [`elevenlabs_stt_example`](examples/elevenlabs_stt_example.rs) | Speech-to-text transcription example using ElevenLabs |
| [`elevenlabs_tts_example`](examples/elevenlabs_tts_example.rs) | Text-to-speech example using ElevenLabs |
| [`openai_stt_example`](examples/openai_stt_example.rs) | Speech-to-text transcription example using OpenAI |
| [`openai_tts_example`](examples/openai_tts_example.rs) | Text-to-speech example using OpenAI |
| [`tts_rodio_example`](examples/tts_rodio_example.rs) | Text-to-speech with rodio example using OpenAI |
| [`chain_audio_text_example`](examples/chain_audio_text_example.rs) | Example demonstrating a multi-step chain combining speech-to-text and text processing |
| [`xai_search_chain_tts_example`](examples/xai_search_chain_tts_example.rs) | Example demonstrating a multi-step chain combining XAI search, OpenAI summarization, and ElevenLabs text-to-speech with Rodio playback |
| [`xai_search_example`](examples/xai_search_example.rs) | Example demonstrating X.AI search functionality with search modes, date ranges, and source filtering |
| [`memory_example`](examples/memory_example.rs) | Automatic memory integration - LLM remembers conversation context across calls |
| [`memory_share_example`](examples/memory_share_example.rs) | Example demonstrating shared memory between multiple LLM providers |
| [`trim_strategy_example`](examples/trim_strategy_example.rs) | Example demonstrating memory trimming strategies with automatic summarization |
| [`agent_builder_example`](examples/agent_builder_example.rs) | Example of reactive agents cooperating via shared memory, demonstrating creation of LLM agents with roles, conditions|
| [`openai_web_search_example`](examples/openai_web_search_example.rs) | Example demonstrating OpenAI web search functionality with location-based search context |
| [`model_listing_example`](examples/model_listing_example.rs) | Example demonstrating how to list available models from an LLM backend |







## Usage
Here's a basic example using OpenAI for chat completion. See the examples directory for other backends (Anthropic, Ollama, DeepSeek, xAI, Google, Phind, Elevenlabs), embedding capabilities, and more advanced use cases.
